KOGITO-7297: [KSW-Guides] Exposing the workflow base metrics to Prometheus (#57)
kiegroup/kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/integrations/expose-metrics-to-prometheus.adoc

:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, metrics, prometheus
// links
:openshift_micrometer_url: https://quarkus.io/blog/micrometer-prometheus-openshift
:dashbuilder_url: https://www.dashbuilder.org/
:grafana_url: https://grafana.com/
:quarkus_micrometer_url: https://quarkus.io/guides/micrometer
:openshift_monitoring_url: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.7/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.html

Kogito Serverless Workflow generate metrics that can be consumed by Prometheus and visualized by dashboard tools such as link:{openshift_micrometer_url}[Openshift], link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder] and link:{grafana_url}[Grafana].

This document describes how to enable and expose metrics to Prometheus.

== Enabling metrics

For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

.Dependency to be added to `pom.xml` to enable metrics
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
    <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

> == Consuming metrics from Openshift

Reviewer: Can we have the Kubernetes/Minikube counterpart as well? I imagine it's just a matter of installing the operator there.

Reviewer: @jesuino, are you planning to add these sections?

If your Serverless Workflow server is running on Openshift you can use it to monitor your application.

To consume metrics from Openshift you must first link:{openshift_monitoring_url}[enable monitoring for user-defined projects]. Then you need to create a service monitor. Here's a sample configuration:

.service-monitor.yaml:
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: prometheus-app-monitor
  name: prometheus-app-monitor
  namespace: my-project
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 30s
    targetPort: 8080
    path: /q/metrics
    scheme: http
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app-with-metrics: 'serverless-workflow-app'
----

Then apply it:

> [source,yaml]

Reviewer 2: should it be a shell command?
```suggestion
[source,shell]
```

Author: thanks! Fixed on my last commit

.Prometheus Configuration
[source,yaml]
----
- job_name: 'Serverless Workflow App'
    scrape_interval: 2s
    metrics_path: /q/metrics
    static_configs:
        - targets: ['localhost:8080']
----

You can edit `job_name` and `scrap_interval` as you want. Make sure that `targets` under `static_configs` match your Serverless Workflow application location.

== Understanding Kogito Serverless Workflow Metrics

For Serverless Workflow we will be looking into the following metrics:

* *kogito_process_instance_completed_total*: Completed Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_started_total*: Started Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_running_total*: Running Workflows
* *kogito_process_instance_duration_seconds_sum*: Workflows Total Duration 

[NOTE]
====
Internally, Workflows are referenced as process hence the fields `processId` and `processName` are actually the workflow id and name.
====

Each of these metrics will have a label for the specific workflow id. See how the metric `kogito_process_instance_completed_total` for workflows `jsongreet`, `yamlgreet` and `foreach` looks like:

> [source,yml]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
```

Exposing the workflow base metrics to Prometheus on Openshift
=============================================================
11-03-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Exposing the workflow base metrics to Prometheus
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, metrics, prometheus
// links
:openshift_micrometer_url: https://quarkus.io/blog/micrometer-prometheus-openshift
:dashbuilder_url: https://www.dashbuilder.org/
:grafana_url: https://grafana.com/
:quarkus_micrometer_url: https://quarkus.io/guides/micrometer

> :openshift_monitoring_url: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.7/monitoring/enabling-monitoring-for-user-defined-projects.html

Reviewer 3: we are now supporting OCP 4.10 and 4.11 just went our so I guess we should update that link

:prometheus_operator_url: https://prometheus-operator.dev/

> Kogito Serverless Workflow generate metrics that can be consumed by Prometheus and visualized by dashboard tools such as link:{openshift_micrometer_url}[Openshift], link:{dashbuilder_url}[Dashbuilder] and link:{grafana_url}[Grafana].

Reviewer 3: Don't we want also to support on Kubernetes ? Is there much a difference ?

Author: The only reason AFAIK is that I didn't try it on a pure Kubernetes installation, only on Openshift

This document describes how to enable and expose metrics to Prometheus.

== Enabling metrics

> For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` to your Maven POM file and, after rebuild, the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.
```

> .Dependency to be added to `pom.xml` to enable metrics

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.Dependency to be added to the `pom.xml` file to enable metrics
```

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
    <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Consuming metrics from Openshift

If your Serverless Workflow server is running on Openshift you can use it to monitor your application.

> To consume metrics from Openshift you must first link:{openshift_monitoring_url}[enable monitoring for user-defined projects]. Then you need to create a service monitor. Here's a sample configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To consume metrics from Openshift you must first link:{openshift_monitoring_url}[enable monitoring for user-defined projects]. It will install the Prometheus operator automatically for you. Then you need to create a service monitor. Here's a sample configuration:
```

> .service-monitor.yaml:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
.service-monitor.yaml
```

[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: prometheus-app-monitor
  name: prometheus-app-monitor
  namespace: my-project
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 30s
    targetPort: 8080
    path: /q/metrics
    scheme: http
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app-with-metrics: 'serverless-workflow-app'
----

Then apply it:

[source,shell]
----
oc apply -f service-monitor.yaml
----

> What we have just done is to create a Service Monitor named `prometheus-app-monitor` that will select apps with the label selector `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app`, make sure that your Serverless Workflow application has this label. Then, OpenShift will call the endpoint `/q/metrics` for all the services labeled with  `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app` every 30 seconds. For more details check the link:{openshift_micrometer_url}:[Monitoring Quarkus apps using Micrometer and Prometheus into OpenShift] guide.

Reviewer 3: ```
make sure that your Serverless Workflow application has this label
```
How do I do that ?

Reviewer 3: ```
Then, OpenShift will call the endpoint `/q/metrics` for all the services labeled with `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app` every 30 seconds
```
Is that really Openshift doing such a thing ? wouldn't that be the Prometheus operator ?

[NOTE]
====

> Kubernetes and minikube users can check the link:{prometheus_operator_url}[Prometheus Operator project].

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Kubernetes and Minikube users can check the link:{prometheus_operator_url}[Prometheus Operator project].
```

Reviewer 3: I would suggest to have a section with Kubernetes and we could add in there:
```
Kubernetes is similar to Openshift but you will need to install manually the link:{prometheus_operator_url}[Prometheus Operator project].
```
wdyt ?

Then maybe we could remove the `on Openshift` in the title of this guide as we show different integrations

====

== Consuming metrics from Prometheus

> Prometheus can scrap metrics from a Kogito Serverless Workflow application using the following configuration:

Reviewer 3: I would link to https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/getting_started/#configure-prometheus-to-monitor-the-sample-targets to explain a bit more how to do this

.Prometheus Configuration
[source,yaml]
----
- job_name: 'Serverless Workflow App'
    scrape_interval: 2s
    metrics_path: /q/metrics
    static_configs:
        - targets: ['localhost:8080']
----

> You can edit `job_name` and `scrap_interval` as you want. Make sure that `targets` under `static_configs` match your Serverless Workflow application location.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can edit `job_name` and `scrap_interval` with your own values. Make sure that `targets` under `static_configs` match your Serverless Workflow application location.
```

* *kogito_process_instance_duration_seconds_sum*: Workflows Total Duration 

[NOTE]
====
Internally, Workflows are referenced as process hence the fields `processId` and `processName` are actually the workflow id and name.
====

Each of these metrics will have a label for the specific workflow id. See how the metric `kogito_process_instance_completed_total` for workflows `jsongreet`, `yamlgreet` and `foreach` looks like:

[source,yaml]
----
# HELP kogito_process_instance_completed_total Completed Process Instances
# TYPE kogito_process_instance_completed_total counter
kogito_process_instance_completed_total{app_id="default-process-monitoring-listener",artifactId="kogito-serverless-workflow-demo",node_name="2",process_id="jsongreet",version="1.0.0-SNAPSHOT",} 154.0
kogito_process_instance_completed_total{app_id="default-process-monitoring-listener",artifactId="kogito-serverless-workflow-demo",node_name="2",process_id="yamlgreet",version="1.0.0-SNAPSHOT",} 218.0
kogito_process_instance_completed_total{app_id="default-process-monitoring-listener",artifactId="kogito-serverless-workflow-demo",node_name="2",process_id="foreach",version="1.0.0-SNAPSHOT",} 162.0
----

[NOTE]
====

> Kogito internally uses Quarkus Micrometer extension, which means that it also expose some built-in metrics. You can disable Micrometer metrics as described in link:quarkus_micrometer_url[Quarkus Micrometer Guide].

Reviewer 3: please correct link

.Dependency to be added to the `pom.xml` file to enable metrics
[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
    <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Consuming metrics from Openshift

If your Serverless Workflow server is running on Openshift you can use it to monitor your application.

To consume metrics from Openshift you must first link:{openshift_monitoring_url}[enable monitoring for user-defined projects]. It will install the Prometheus operator automatically for you. Then you need to create a service monitor. Here's a sample configuration:

.service-monitor.yaml:
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  labels:
    k8s-app: prometheus-app-monitor
  name: prometheus-app-monitor
  namespace: my-project
spec:
  endpoints:
  - interval: 30s
    targetPort: 8080
    path: /q/metrics
    scheme: http
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app-with-metrics: 'serverless-workflow-app'
----

Then apply it:

[source,shell]
----
oc apply -f service-monitor.yaml
----

> What we have just done is to create a Service Monitor named `prometheus-app-monitor` that will select apps with the label selector `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app`, make sure that your Serverless Workflow application has this label. Then, Prometheus will call the endpoint `/q/metrics` for all the services labeled with  `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app` every 30 seconds. For more details check the link:{openshift_micrometer_url}:[Monitoring Quarkus apps using Micrometer and Prometheus into OpenShift] guide.

Reviewer 3: @ricardozanini @jesuino this is not solved sorry

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
What we have just done is to create a Service Monitor named `prometheus-app-monitor` that will select apps with the label selector `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app`, make sure that your Serverless Workflow application has this label. Then, Prometheus will call the endpoint `/q/metrics` for all the services labeled with  `app-with-metrics: serverless-workflow-app` every 30 seconds. For more details check the link:{openshift_micrometer_url}[Monitoring Quarkus apps using Micrometer and Prometheus into OpenShift] guide.
```

== Consuming metrics from Kubernetes

Kubernetes is similar to Openshift but you will need to install manually the link:{prometheus_operator_url}[Prometheus Operator project].

== Consuming metrics from Prometheus

> Prometheus can scrap metrics from a Kogito Serverless Workflow application using the following configuration:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Prometheus can also scrap directly metrics from a Kogito Serverless Workflow application using the following configuration:
```

Exposing the workflow base metrics to Prometheus
================================================
11-03-2022
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Exposing the workflow base metrics to Prometheus
:keywords: kogito, workflow, quarkus, metrics, prometheus
// links

> :openshift_micrometer_tutorial: https://quarkus.io/blog/micrometer-prometheus-openshift

Reviewer 4: please add the _url suffix to the urls.

:dashbuilder_website: https://www.dashbuilder.org/
:grafana_website: https://grafana.com/
:quarkus_micrometer_guide: https://quarkus.io/guides/micrometer

Kogito Serverless Workflow generate metrics that can be consumed by Prometheus and visualized by dashboard tools such as link:{openshift_micrometer_tutorial}[Openshift], link:{dashbuilder_website}[Dashbuilder] and link:{grafana_website}[Grafana].

This document describes how to enable and expose metrics to Prometheus.

== Enabling metrics

For adding metrics to your Serverless Workflow application just add the dependency `org.kie.kogito:kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus` and the metrics will be available in `/q/metrics` URL.

.Dependency to be added to `pom.xml` to enable metrics

> [source,xml]

Reviewer 4: does it worth to add gradle as well?

----
<dependency>
    <groupId>org.kie.kogito</groupId>
    <artifactId>kogito-addons-quarkus-monitoring-prometheus</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

== Consuming metrics from Prometheus

Prometheus can scrap metrics from a Kogito Serverless Workflow application using the following configuration:

.Prometheus Configuration

> [source,yml]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
```
